# Forest as the economic backborn
The forests in the Nordic countries cover only 1.6% of the world’s forested area, but the region supplies 18%, 15%, and 13% of the world’s paper, sawn timber, and pulp, respectively. Successful long-term management of forest resources requires healthy trees, which depends on many factors, including soil conditions. The soil medium is crucial as it ensures a supply of essential nutrients for plants, such as nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P).

# Threats
Most evidence suggests that temperate and boreal forest growth is primarily N-limited, not P-limited. Thus, the P cycle and supply to trees are often not considered critical factors in forest management. However, increasingly P-limiting conditions have been reported in European forests, including Nordic boreal regions despite the young age of the soils (<15,000 years). In the Scandinavian region, prevailing conditions such as cool climate, slowly-decaying evergreen conifer litter, soil acidification, and a parent material consisting of nutrient-poor siliceous glacial till influence the weathering of primary minerals in forest ecosystems. These factors lead to Podzolisation as the primary soil-forming process. Podzolisation involves the accumulation of large amounts of weathered aluminium (Al) and iron (Fe) mineral phases in the subsoil (B horizon). These chemical compounds can strongly adsorb dissolved P. Thus, the Podzol (spodic) B horizon stores a relatively large amount of P, but only a minor fraction is bioavailable. Consequently, recycling P (organic P) previously acquired from the mineral soil by plants and deposited mainly in the surface horizon is an important process by which plants 13 maintain a sufficient P supply. With continued stabilisation of P through binding to Fe and Al in the mineral soil, P availability gradually declines, resulting in ‘sink-driven’ P limitation. However, many details remain unclear, e.g. the P forms and their stocks in podzolised soil horizons in boreal regions. In addition to the build-up of fixed P, there is evidence that logging, particularly whole-tree harvesting (WTH), can lead to a long-term decline in P availability. For example, found that WTH in the Hubbard Brook forest ecosystem in New Hampshire, USA, removed 50 kg P ha−1 in a single clearcut. The rate of P loss due to WTH is reported to exceed 1 kg P ha−1 yr−1 (Akselsson et al., 2008). In some countries, including Sweden, the application of wood ash, a by-product of wood fuel combustion, is recommended to maintain soil fertility and offset P removal after harvest (Swedish Forest Agency, 2019). The ash contains all nutrients except N.

# Innovative- recycling of waste products

Many studies have explored the solubility and availability of P after ash application, but the results reported are sometimes contradictory. Moreover, the mechanisms involved and the fate of ash-bound P product (P speciation) upon addition are largely unknown. Detailed information on the molecular-scale speciation and fate of native and applied P is therefore needed for a fundamental understanding of the reactions that affect P mobility and solubility. To date, this knowledge is lacking for northern boreal soils.
